sections/impact2cont.md, before:

[<<< Previous](impact2.md) | [Next >>>](impact3.md)

# Level of impact II, continued

## Ramifications of (re)producing categories

Decisions on the categories and boundaries scholars use shape our:

- Datasets
- Catalogues
- Maps
- Algorithms

Categories are key to digital tools in many ways: the classification systems used by libraries and archives, the tags used on websites, the methods of categorization informing algorithms, and the spatial divisions on a map. The production and reproduction of these categories shapes how things/people/places etc. are identified and grouped together, and also what is searchable, findable, and foregrounded.

![A comic from Postcolonial #DH No. 28 by Adeline Koh: "Wikipedia and the politics of gender categorization." In the image, a bunch of white men stand to the left behind a roped off area, and a bunch of people of color and women stand to the right. A white male facing the people to the right says to them, "I'm sorry, there just isn't any more space in the main wikipedia 'American Novelist' category. Maybe you oculd join the 'American Woman Novelist' category?"](../images/wiki.png)  

Image source: A comic by Adeline Koh from [#DHPoco: Postcolonial Digital Humanities](http://dhpoco.tumblr.com/), shared here with her permission.  

## Human biases and disregard

**Human beings** are making decisions that inform how these groupings are being made.

> "Writing a presentation on library cataloging and classification & realizing that there is nothing serendipitous about serendipitous browsing. As with everything else, someone *decided* where the book you found on the shelf would land. Someone with biases because we all have them" (Jenna Freedman @zinelib on Twitter, shared here with her permission. Also see: [Jenna Freedman, "Library Cataloging and Classification: Reifying the Default," 2018](https://lowereastsidelibrarian.info/talks/2018/moma))  

> "Human beings are developing the digital platforms we use, and as I present evidence of the recklessness and lack of regard that is often shown to women and people of color in some of the output of these systems, it will become increasingly difficult for technology companies to separate their systematic and inequitable employment practices, and the far-right ideological bents of some of their employees, from the products they make for the public." ([Safiya Umoja Noble, *Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism*, 2018, page 2](https://nyupress.org/books/9781479837243/))  

## Attempts to "resist the hierarchy"  

Some questions to consider:

Can categorical hierarchies be resisted through digital projects? If such resistance is possible, how can it be achieved?

Projects to check out:

- [The #StandingRockSyllabus](https://nycstandswithstandingrock.wordpress.com/standingrocksyllabus/)  
- [The Zine Librarians Code of Ethics](http://zinelibraries.info/code-of-ethics/)  
- [Native-Land.ca (mapping project)](https://native-land.ca/)  
- [Invasion of America: How the United States Took Over an Eighth of the World (mapping project)](http://usg.maps.arcgis.com/apps/webappviewer/index.html?id=eb6ca76e008543a89349ff2517db47e6)  

## Activity:

Let's analyze and discuss a case study.  

Check out the [Interference Archive (IA) website](http://interferencearchive.org/), read [this brief article](http://technical.ly/brooklyn/2016/11/28/interference-archive-activism-jen-hoyer/%20) and discuss:  

* What kinds of materials does IA host and do they have rights to it?
* In reference to the article, how does IA see itself as “resisting the hierarchy”?
* What levels of impact does IA aim to take into account?  

Discuss with your table, then share as a group.  

[<<< Previous](impact2.md) | [Next >>>](impact3.md)

Commit message:

revised to input/output phrasing
tried to revise per patrick sweeney's comments and some additional ideas

sections/impact2cont.md, after:

[<<< Previous](impact2.md) | [Next >>>](impact3.md)

# Level of impact II, continued

## Ramifications of (re)producing categories

Decisions on the categories and boundaries scholars use shape our:

- Datasets
- Catalogues
- Maps
- Algorithms

Categories are key to digital tools in many ways: the classification systems used by libraries and archives, the tags used on websites, the methods of categorization informing algorithms, and the spatial divisions on a map. The production and reproduction of these categories shapes how things/people/places etc. are identified and grouped together, and also what is searchable, findable, and foregrounded.

![A comic from Postcolonial #DH No. 28 by Adeline Koh: "Wikipedia and the politics of gender categorization." In the image, a bunch of white men stand to the left behind a roped off area, and a bunch of people of color and women stand to the right. A white male facing the people to the right says to them, "I'm sorry, there just isn't any more space in the main wikipedia 'American Novelist' category. Maybe you oculd join the 'American Woman Novelist' category?"](../images/wiki.png)  

Image source: A comic by Adeline Koh from [#DHPoco: Postcolonial Digital Humanities](http://dhpoco.tumblr.com/), shared here with her permission.  

## Systems of oppression, human input, and digitized/computed output 

**Human beings** are making decisions that inform how these groupings are being made. 

The United States, for example, is a society shaped by dominant systems of oppression such as white supremacy, settler colonialism, and cis-hetero-patriarchy. These oppresive systems effect—sometimes intentionally, sometimes not—the decisions people make when they create digital platforms or tools (or anything for that matter!), and thus also shape the output that results from these digital platforms or tools or their computations.  

> "Writing a presentation on library cataloging and classification & realizing that there is nothing serendipitous about serendipitous browsing. As with everything else, someone *decided* where the book you found on the shelf would land. Someone with biases because we all have them" (Jenna Freedman @zinelib on Twitter, shared here with her permission. Also see: [Jenna Freedman, "Library Cataloging and Classification: Reifying the Default," 2018](https://lowereastsidelibrarian.info/talks/2018/moma))  

> "Human beings are developing the digital platforms we use, and as I present evidence of the recklessness and lack of regard that is often shown to women and people of color in some of the output of these systems, it will become increasingly difficult for technology companies to separate their systematic and inequitable employment practices, and the far-right ideological bents of some of their employees, from the products they make for the public." ([Safiya Umoja Noble, *Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism*, 2018, page 2](https://nyupress.org/books/9781479837243/))  

## Attempts to "resist the hierarchy"  

Some questions to consider:

Can categorical hierarchies be resisted through digital projects? If such resistance is possible, how can it be achieved?

Projects to check out:

- [The #StandingRockSyllabus](https://nycstandswithstandingrock.wordpress.com/standingrocksyllabus/)  
- [The Zine Librarians Code of Ethics](http://zinelibraries.info/code-of-ethics/)  
- [Native-Land.ca (mapping project)](https://native-land.ca/)  
- [Invasion of America: How the United States Took Over an Eighth of the World (mapping project)](http://usg.maps.arcgis.com/apps/webappviewer/index.html?id=eb6ca76e008543a89349ff2517db47e6)  

## Activity:

Let's analyze and discuss a case study.  

Check out the [Interference Archive (IA) website](http://interferencearchive.org/), read [this brief article](http://technical.ly/brooklyn/2016/11/28/interference-archive-activism-jen-hoyer/%20) and discuss:  

* What kinds of materials does IA host and do they have rights to it?
* In reference to the article, how does IA see itself as “resisting the hierarchy”?
* What levels of impact does IA aim to take into account?  

Discuss with your table, then share as a group.  

[<<< Previous](impact2.md) | [Next >>>](impact3.md)
