sections/impact3.md, before:

[<<< Previous](impact2.md) | [Next >>>](range.md)

# Level of Impact #3

## Social, political, and economic impacts  

> At a third level of impact, we can consider **the social, economic, or political changes caused** by one’s research processes or products, in both the short and long term. ([Annette Markham, "OKCupid data release fiasco: It’s time to rethink ethics education," 2016](http://annettemarkham.com/2016/05/okcupid-data-release-fiasco-its-time-to-rethink-ethics-education/), emphasis added)  

Some questions to consider:

* Whose **labor** and what **materials** are used to make the digital tools you use?  
> the energy demands for digital daily life, a key source of big data for social science research, are significant in this era of climate change ... should researchers take the lead in asking cloud storage providers and data processing centers to shift to sustainable and renewable energy sources? ([Matthew Zook et al, "Ten simple rules for responsible big data research," 2017](http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005399))  
* Could your research or project be used to justify or facilitate potentially harmful **control** or **surveillance**?    
* Could it influence **social or political discourse**? Modes of **profit**?  
> to what extent is a research project focused on enhancing the public good or the underserved of society? Are questions about equity or promoting other public values being addressed in one’s data streams, or is a big data focus rendering them invisible or irrelevant to your analysis [37]? How can increasingly vulnerable yet fundamentally important public resources—such as state-mandated cancer registries—be protected? How might research aid or inhibit different business and political actors? ([Matthew Zook et al, "Ten simple rules for responsible big data research," 2017](http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005399))  

These are *big* questions.  

A researcher should not be expected to have all the answers or predict the future. The aim here is to thoughtfully consider these questions, to think critically about potential positive and negative effects of research and projects, and to be responsible and accountable.  

As Annette Markham reminds us, as discussed earlier in this workshop:  
> an impact approach is targeted toward the possible or probable impact, rather than the prevention of impact in the first place. It acknowledges that we change the world as we conduct even the smallest of scientific studies, and therefore, we must take some personal responsibility for our methods. ([Annette Markham, "OKCupid data release fiasco: It’s time to rethink ethics education," 2016](http://annettemarkham.com/2016/05/okcupid-data-release-fiasco-its-time-to-rethink-ethics-education/))  

![close-up photo of a drop of water falling into a pool of water, creating a series of concentric ripples](../images/ripple.jpg)  
Image source: [Sergiu Bacioiu from Romania, "Ripple effect on water," Wikimedia, Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 Generic license](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ripple_effect_on_water.jpg)  

Further readings:  
[Xiang Biao, *Global Body Shopping: An Indian Labor System in the Information Technology Industry*, 2007](https://press.princeton.edu/titles/8315.html)  
[Elsa Davidson, *The Burdens of Aspiration: Schools, Youth, and Success in the Divided Social Worlds of Silicon Valley*, 2011](https://nyupress.org/books/9780814720875/)  
[Anna Lauren Hoffmann, "Data Violence and How Bad Engineering Choices Can Damage Society," 2018](https://medium.com/s/story/data-violence-and-how-bad-engineering-choices-can-damage-society-39e44150e1d4)  
[The Policing in Chicago Research Group, "Tracked and Targeted: Early Findings on Chicago's Gang Database," 2018](http://erasethedatabase.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Tracked-Targeted-0217.pdf)  
[Safiya Umoja Noble, *Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism*, 2018](https://nyupress.org/books/9781479837243/)  
[Cathy O'Neil, *Methods of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens Democracy*, 2016](https://weaponsofmathdestructionbook.com/)  
[Matthew Zook et al, "Ten simple rules for responsible big data research," 2017](http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005399)  

## Activity   

Think about the digital project or research you are or will be working on. 

* Whose labor and what materials do you rely upon to do your work?  
* Could your research or project be used to justify or facilitate potentially harmful control or surveillance-by e.g. the state, a vigilante group, an abusive partner?  
* How could your work cause changes to or justify social, economic or political discourses?  
* Will your work be used for profit, for who?  

Pair up with another person near you and discuss. Share as a class.    

[<<< Previous](impact2.md) | [Next >>>](range.md)

Commit message:

New quote, more specific definition of accessibility, copy edits, "sensory" disabilities in additon to physical

sections/impact3.md, after:

[<<< Previous](impact2.md) | [Next >>>](range.md)

# Level of impact III

## Social, political, and economic impacts

> At a third level of impact, we can consider **the social, economic, or political changes caused** by one’s research processes or products, in both the short and long term. ([Annette Markham, "OKCupid data release fiasco: It’s time to rethink ethics education," 2016](http://annettemarkham.com/2016/05/okcupid-data-release-fiasco-its-time-to-rethink-ethics-education/), emphasis added)  

Some questions to consider:

- Whose **labor** and what **materials** are used to make the digital tools you use?  

> the energy demands for digital daily life, a key source of big data for social science research, are significant in this era of climate change ... should researchers take the lead in asking cloud storage providers and data processing centers to shift to sustainable and renewable energy sources? ([Matthew Zook et al, "Ten simple rules for responsible big data research," 2017](http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005399))  

* Could your research or project be used to justify or facilitate potentially harmful **control** or **surveillance**?    

> “The reason that we are subject now to more surveillance than there was in the Soviet Union is that digital technology made it possible,” he says. “And the first disaster of digital technology was proprietary software that people would install and run on their own computers, and they wouldn't know what it was doing. Richard Stallman. ​​​​​​​["The Vanishing State of Privacy​​​​​."](http://magazine.factor-tech.com/factor_winter_2017/richard_stallman_and_the_vanishing_state_of_privacy).


* Could it influence **social or political discourse**? Modes of **profit**?

> to what extent is a research project focused on enhancing the public good or the underserved of society? Are questions about equity or promoting other public values being addressed in one’s data streams, or is a big data focus rendering them invisible or irrelevant to your analysis [37]? How can increasingly vulnerable yet fundamentally important public resources—such as state-mandated cancer registries—be protected? How might research aid or inhibit different business and political actors? ([Matthew Zook, et al, "Ten simple rules for responsible big data research," 2017](http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005399))  

These are *big* questions.  

A researcher should not be expected to have all the answers or predict the future. The aim here is to thoughtfully consider these questions, to think critically about potential positive and negative effects of research and projects, and to be responsible and accountable.  

As Annette Markham reminds us, as discussed earlier in this session:  

> an impact approach is targeted toward the possible or probable impact, rather than the prevention of impact in the first place. It acknowledges that we change the world as we conduct even the smallest of scientific studies, and therefore, we must take some personal responsibility for our methods. ([Annette Markham, "OKCupid data release fiasco: It’s time to rethink ethics education," 2016](http://annettemarkham.com/2016/05/okcupid-data-release-fiasco-its-time-to-rethink-ethics-education/))  

![close-up photo of a drop of water falling into a pool of water, creating a series of concentric ripples](../images/ripple.jpg)  
Image source: [Sergiu Bacioiu from Romania, "Ripple effect on water," Wikimedia, Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 Generic license](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ripple_effect_on_water.jpg)  

Further readings:  
[Xiang Biao, *Global Body Shopping: An Indian Labor System in the Information Technology Industry*, 2007](https://press.princeton.edu/titles/8315.html)  
[Elsa Davidson, *The Burdens of Aspiration: Schools, Youth, and Success in the Divided Social Worlds of Silicon Valley*, 2011](https://nyupress.org/books/9780814720875/)  
[Anna Lauren Hoffmann, "Data Violence and How Bad Engineering Choices Can Damage Society," 2018](https://medium.com/s/story/data-violence-and-how-bad-engineering-choices-can-damage-society-39e44150e1d4)  
[The Policing in Chicago Research Group, "Tracked and Targeted: Early Findings on Chicago's Gang Database," 2018](http://erasethedatabase.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Tracked-Targeted-0217.pdf)  
[Safiya Umoja Noble, *Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism*, 2018](https://nyupress.org/books/9781479837243/)  
[Cathy O'Neil, *Methods of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens Democracy*, 2016](https://weaponsofmathdestructionbook.com/)  
[Matthew Zook et al, "Ten simple rules for responsible big data research," 2017](http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005399)  

## Activity   

Think about the digital project or research you are or will be working on. 

* Whose labor and what materials do you rely upon to do your work?  
* Could your research or project be used to justify or facilitate potentially harmful control or surveillance-by e.g. the state, a vigilante group, an abusive partner?  
* How could your work cause changes to or justify social, economic or political discourses?  
* Will your work be used for profit, for who?  

Pair up with another person near you and discuss. Share as a class.    

[<<< Previous](impact2.md) | [Next >>>](range.md)
