sections/resources.md, before:

[<<< Previous](cases.md)  

# Resources on ethics for digital projects and research

*Note that these resources are just a sampling of readings and projects that may be useful for thinking about or demonstrative of critically ethical approaches to digital projects and research, but there are many more resources out there!*

## US government regulations and general IRB information:

[The Belmont Report](https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy/belmont-report/index.html#xbasic)  
[US Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects, note new changes - effective January 19, 2018](https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2017/01/19/2017-01058/federal-policy-for-the-protection-of-human-subjects)  
["Investigator Responsibilities FAQs," compiled by Office for Human Research Protections, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services](https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy/guidance/faq/investigator-responsibilities/index.html)  
[Regulations and Policy in the US, compiled by the Office for Human Research Protections, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services](https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy)  
[International Compilation of Human Research Standards (by country), compiled by the Office for Human Research Protections, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services](https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/international/compilation-human-research-standards/index.html)  

## Key works (among many more!) on the politics of knowledge production and forms of knowledge:

[Stuart Hall et al., *Policing the Crisis: Mugging, the State, and Law and Order*, 1978](https://colectivociajpp.files.wordpress.com/2012/08/stuart-hall-etc-policing-the-crisis-mugging-the-state-and-law-and-order-critical-social-studies-1978.pdf)  
[Antonio Gramsci, various writings](https://www.marxists.org/archive/gramsci/)  
[Michel Foucault, "Panopticism," 1977](http://dm.ncl.ac.uk/courseblog/files/2011/03/michel-foucault-panopticism.pdf)  
[Michel Foucault, *The Archaeology of Knowledge and the Discourse on Language*, 1969](https://monoskop.org/images/9/90/Foucault_Michel_Archaeology_of_Knowledge.pdf)  
[Dwight Conquergood, "Performance Studies: Interventions and Radical Research," 2002](http://www.csun.edu/~vcspc00g/301/psinterventions-tdr.pdf)  
[Diana Taylor, *The Archive and the Repertoire*, 2003](https://www.dukeupress.edu/the-archive-and-the-repertoire)  
[Donna Haraway, "Situated Knowledges," 1988](http://www.staff.amu.edu.pl/~ewa/Haraway,%20Situated%20Knowledges.pdf)  

## General information on digital ethics beyond compliance:

[Annette Markham, “OKCupid data release fiasco: It’s time to rethink ethics education,” 2016](http://annettemarkham.com/2016/05/okcupid-data-release-fiasco-its-time-to-rethink-ethics-education/)  
[Casey Fiesler, table of "Tech Ethics Curricula" - including links to syllabi](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1jWIrA8jHz5fYAW4h9CkUD8gKS5V98PDJDymRf8d9vKI/edit#gid=0)  
[FemTechNet](https://femtechnet.org/)  

## On internet, social media and "big data" research ethics:

[Annette Markam, Elizabeth Buchanon, the AoIR  Ethics Committee, and AoIR general membership, "Ethical Decision-Making and Internet Research: Recommendations from the AoIR Ethics Working Committee (Version 2.0)," 2012](http://aoir.org/reports/ethics2.pdf)  
[Annette Markam and Elizabeth Buchanon, “Ethical Concerns in Internet Research,” forthcoming](https://www.academia.edu/8037870/Ethical_Concerns_in_Internet_Research)  
[Susan Barnes, “A Privacy Paradox,” 2006](http://firstmonday.org/article/view/1394/1312)  
[Bettina Berendt, Marco Büchler, and Geoffrey Rockwell, “Is it Research or is it Spying? Thinking-Through Ethics in Big Data AI and Other Knowledge Sciences,” 2015)](http://theoreti.ca/?p=5729)  
[Michael Zimmer and Katharina Kinder-Kurlanda, editors, *Internet Research Ethics for the Social Age: New Challenges, Cases, and Contexts*, 2017](https://www.scribd.com/document/360717441/Internet-Research-Ethics-for-the-Social-Age-New-Challenges-Cases-and-Contexts-Full)  
[Patrick Sweeney, "Images of Faces Gleaned from Social Media in Social Psychological Research on Sexual Orientation," 2017](https://www.academia.edu/34001772/Images_of_Faces_Gleaned_from_Social_Media_in_Social_Psychological_Research_on_Sexual_Orientation)  
[Safiya Umoja Noble, *The Intersectional Internet: Race, Sex, Class, and Culture Online*, 2016](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1433130009/ref=cm_sw_r_sms_awd_d_JdrqxbYHPQSAT)  
[Matthew Zook, Solon Barocas, danah boyd, Kate Crawford, Emily Keller, Seeta Peña Gangadharan, Alyssa Goodman, Rachelle Hollander, Barbara A. Koenig, Jacob Metcalf, Arvind Narayanan, Alondra Nelson, Frank Pasquale, "Ten simple rules for responsible big data research," 2017](http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005399)  
[Jason Young and Michael Gilmore, "Subaltern Empowerment in the Geoweb: Tensions between Publicity and Privacy," 2014](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/anti.12056)  

## On ethics, algorithms and databases:

[Tarleton Gillespie and Nick Seaver, Critical Algorithm Studies: a Reading List, 2016](https://socialmediacollective.org/reading-lists/critical-algorithm-studies/)  
[Safiya Umoja Noble, *Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism*, 2018](https://nyupress.org/books/9781479837243/)  
[Cathy O'Neil, *Methods of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens Democracy*, 2016](https://weaponsofmathdestructionbook.com/)  
[Julia Angwen and Jeff Larson, "Bias in Criminal Risk Scores Is Mathematically Inevitable, Researchers Say," 2016](https://www.propublica.org/article/bias-in-criminal-risk-scores-is-mathematically-inevitable-researchers-say)  
[ProPublica's series of articles on "Machine Bias: Investigating Algorithmic Injustice"](https://www.propublica.org/series/machine-bias/)  
[The Brian Lehrer Show, "Getting Algorithms Right" (podcast), 2018](https://www.wnyc.org/story/algorithms-better-or-worse/)  
[The Policing in Chicago Research Group, "Tracked and Targeted: Early Findings on Chicago's Gang Database," 2018](http://erasethedatabase.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Tracked-Targeted-0217.pdf)  
[Darren Abramson and Lee Pike, "When Formal Systems Kill: Computer Ethics and Formal Methods," 2011](https://www.cs.indiana.edu/~lepike/pubs/fm-ethics.pdf)  
[Anna Lauren Hoffmann, "Data Violence and How Bad Engineering Choices Can Damage Society," 2018](https://medium.com/s/story/data-violence-and-how-bad-engineering-choices-can-damage-society-39e44150e1d4)  
[Roshanak Kheshti, interviewed by Kelsey Chatlosh, "Interview: Sound recording, oral positionality, and audio as ethnographic object," 2018](http://parameters.ssrc.org/2018/04/interview-sound-recording-oral-positionality-and-audio-as-ethnographic-object/)  
[Doug Boyd, "Informed Accessioning: Questions to Ask After the Interview," 2015](http://ohda.matrix.msu.edu/2015/03/informed-accessioning-questions-to-ask-after-the-interview/)  

## On public sharing and accessibility for differently abled people:

[Samir Chopra and Scott Dexter, *Decoding Liberation: The Promise of Free and Open Source Software*, 2007](http://www.sci.brooklyn.cuny.edu/~bcfoss/DL/)  
[Patrick Smyth, "Materials for Open and Accessible: A Critical Distinction at Teach@CUNY Day"](https://github.com/pbsmyth/open_and_accessible)  
[Creative Commons](https://creativecommons.org/)  
[Dr. Joshua Miele’s](http://www.ski.org/users/joshua-miele) work on digital accessibility - see a review of his GC talk by Nanyamkah Mars [here](http://dh.prattsils.org/blog/resources/event-reviews/digital-accessibility-and-the-making-of-a-meta-maker-movement-a-talk-by-dr-joshua-miele-hosted-by-gc-digital-initiatives-at-the-graduate-center-cuny-on-thursday-october-20-2016/)  
[George Williams, "Disability, Universal Design, and the Digital Humanities" in *Debates in the Digital Humanities*, ed. Matt Gold, 2012](http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/44)  
[Tyler Zoanni, "Creating an Accessible Online Presentation," 2017](https://culanth.org/fieldsights/1335-creating-an-accessible-online-presentation)  

## On accessibility in different languages:  

[Humanidades Digitales Library Guide, prepared by The Graduate Center, CUNY, Library](https://libguides.gc.cuny.edu/c.php?g=405353&p=5674973)  

## On data security and management:  

[Patrick Smyth, GCDI Information Security Workshop](https://github.com/smythp/security-workshop)  
[Stephen Zweibel, Data Management (presentation), 2017](http://zweibel.net/presentations/data.html#/)  
[Lindsay Lloyd-Smith, “Archaeology: Principles and Practices of Digital Data Management," 2016](http://www.americananthro.org/LearnAndTeach/Content.aspx?ItemNumber=20668)   

## On ethical and political debates within the field of digital humanities (DH):

[Domenico Fiormonte, "Digital Humanities and the Geopolitics of Knowledge," 2017](https://www.digitalstudies.org/article/10.16995/dscn.274/)  
[Wendy Hui Kyong Chun, Richard Grusin, Patrick Jagoda, and Rita Raley, "The Dark Side of the Digital Humanities" in *Debates in the Digital Humanities*, ed. Matt Gold, 2016](http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/89)  
[Tara McPherson, "Why Are the Digital Humanities So White? or Thinking the Histories of Race and Computation" in *Debates in the Digital Humanities*, ed. Matt Gold, 2012](http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/29)  
[Elizabeth Losh, "Hacktivism and the Humanities: Programming Protest in the Era of the Digital University" in *Debates in the Digital Humanities*, ed. Matt Gold, 2012](http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/32)  

## On divisions of labor on digital projects and "digital carework" (Risam 2018):  

[Roopika Risam, "Diversity work and digital carework in higher education," 2018](http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/8241/6651)  
[Rafia Mirza, Brett Currier and Peace Ossom Williamson, "Memorandum of Understanding Collection" - MOUs to apply for large scale collaborative projects](https://uta-ir.tdl.org/uta-ir/handle/10106/25646)  
[Audrey Watters, "Invisible Labor and Digital Utopias," 2018](http://hackeducation.com/2018/05/04/cuny-labor-open)  

## On labor, political economy, and technology: 

[Xiang Biao, *Global Body Shopping: An Indian Labor System in the Information Technology Industry*, 2007](https://press.princeton.edu/titles/8315.html)  
[Elsa Davidson, *The Burdens of Aspiration: Schools, Youth, and Success in the Divided Social Worlds of Silicon Valley*, 2011](https://nyupress.org/books/9780814720875/)  

## On post- / de- / anti- colonial digital humanities (DH):

[Adeline Koh and Roopika Risam, Postcolonial Digital Humanities (website)](http://dhpoco.org/)  
[Ashley Morford and Arun Jacob, session leaders, "Let's Plan a Course: Bringing the Anti-, De-, & Post-Colonial into Digital Space, Time, & Pedagogy" at DHSI 2017 (unconference session notes)](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15XLNrzZLaC3ZfNh1Z4ssppEmB49mlhmlCMvVR8Ofw5w/edit?usp=sharing)  

### Some examples of anti-colonial digital projects and research:

[Design for Diversity project](http://dsg.neu.edu/research/design-for-diversity/about/)  
[Siobhan Senier, “Indigenizing Wikipedia,” 2015](http://epress.trincoll.edu/webwriting/chapter/senier/)  
[Angela Haas, “Wampum as Hypertext,” 2007](https://muse.jhu.edu/article/235980)  
[Marisa Elena Duarte, *Network Sovereignty: Building the Internet across Indian Country*, 2017](http://www.washington.edu/uwpress/search/books/DUANET.html)  
[The #StandingRockSyllabus](https://nycstandswithstandingrock.wordpress.com/standingrocksyllabus/)  
[Native-Land.ca (mapping project)](https://native-land.ca/)  
[Invasion of America: How the United States Took Over an Eighth of the World (mapping project)](http://usg.maps.arcgis.com/apps/webappviewer/index.html?id=eb6ca76e008543a89349ff2517db47e6) 

## On digital activism, its possibilities and its limitations:

[Zeynep Tufekci, "After the Protests," 2014](https://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/20/opinion/after-the-protests.html?rref=collection%2Fcolumn%2Fzeynep-tufekci&action=click&contentCollection=opinion&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=14&pgtype=collection)  
[Zeynep Tufekci, *Twitter and Teargas: The Power and Fragility of Networked Protest*, 2017](https://www.twitterandteargas.org/)  
[Sasha Costanza-Chock, *Out of the Shadows, Into the Streets! Transmedia Organizing and the Immigrant Rights Movement*, 2014](https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/out-shadows-streets)  
[Aimee Cox, "The Choreography of Survival," 2015](https://culanth.org/fieldsights/690-the-choreography-of-survival)  
[Melissa Checker, "Stop FEMA Now: Social media, activism and the sacrificed citizen," 2016](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0016718516301750)  
[Jarret Martineau, "Rhythms of Change: Mobilizing Decolonial Consciousness, Indigenous Resurgence and the Idle No More Movement," in *More Will Sing Their Way to Freedom: Indigenous Resistance and Resurgence*, ed. Elaine Coburn, 2015](https://fernwoodpublishing.ca/book/more-will-sing-their-way-to-freedom)  

******

## Know of more useful resources that are not listed above?

Email me to request to add something to this resource list:

Kelsey Chatlosh  
GC, CUNY, Digital Fellow  
Cultural Anthropology Student  
Kchatlosh@gradcenter.cuny.edu  
She / her  

[<<< Previous](cases.md)  
[<<< Return to beginning](https://github.com/DHRI-Curriculum/ethics)

Commit message:

changes to accessibility section
slightly re-organized accessibility section, added lawton et al article

sections/resources.md, after:

[<<< Previous](cases.md)  

# Resources on ethics for digital projects and research

*Note that these resources are just a sampling of readings and projects that may be useful for thinking about or demonstrative of critically ethical approaches to digital projects and research, but there are many more resources out there!*

## US government regulations and general IRB information:

[The Belmont Report](https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy/belmont-report/index.html#xbasic)  
[US Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects, note new changes - effective January 19, 2018](https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2017/01/19/2017-01058/federal-policy-for-the-protection-of-human-subjects)  
["Investigator Responsibilities FAQs," compiled by Office for Human Research Protections, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services](https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy/guidance/faq/investigator-responsibilities/index.html)  
[Regulations and Policy in the US, compiled by the Office for Human Research Protections, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services](https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy)  
[International Compilation of Human Research Standards (by country), compiled by the Office for Human Research Protections, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services](https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/international/compilation-human-research-standards/index.html)  

## Key works (among many more!) on the politics of knowledge production and forms of knowledge:

[Stuart Hall et al., *Policing the Crisis: Mugging, the State, and Law and Order*, 1978](https://colectivociajpp.files.wordpress.com/2012/08/stuart-hall-etc-policing-the-crisis-mugging-the-state-and-law-and-order-critical-social-studies-1978.pdf)  
[Antonio Gramsci, various writings](https://www.marxists.org/archive/gramsci/)  
[Michel Foucault, "Panopticism," 1977](http://dm.ncl.ac.uk/courseblog/files/2011/03/michel-foucault-panopticism.pdf)  
[Michel Foucault, *The Archaeology of Knowledge and the Discourse on Language*, 1969](https://monoskop.org/images/9/90/Foucault_Michel_Archaeology_of_Knowledge.pdf)  
[Dwight Conquergood, "Performance Studies: Interventions and Radical Research," 2002](http://www.csun.edu/~vcspc00g/301/psinterventions-tdr.pdf)  
[Diana Taylor, *The Archive and the Repertoire*, 2003](https://www.dukeupress.edu/the-archive-and-the-repertoire)  
[Donna Haraway, "Situated Knowledges," 1988](http://www.staff.amu.edu.pl/~ewa/Haraway,%20Situated%20Knowledges.pdf)  

## General information on digital ethics beyond compliance:

[Annette Markham, “OKCupid data release fiasco: It’s time to rethink ethics education,” 2016](http://annettemarkham.com/2016/05/okcupid-data-release-fiasco-its-time-to-rethink-ethics-education/)  
[Casey Fiesler, table of "Tech Ethics Curricula" - including links to syllabi](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1jWIrA8jHz5fYAW4h9CkUD8gKS5V98PDJDymRf8d9vKI/edit#gid=0)  
[FemTechNet](https://femtechnet.org/)  

## On internet, social media and "big data" research ethics:

[Annette Markam, Elizabeth Buchanon, the AoIR  Ethics Committee, and AoIR general membership, "Ethical Decision-Making and Internet Research: Recommendations from the AoIR Ethics Working Committee (Version 2.0)," 2012](http://aoir.org/reports/ethics2.pdf)  
[Annette Markam and Elizabeth Buchanon, “Ethical Concerns in Internet Research,” forthcoming](https://www.academia.edu/8037870/Ethical_Concerns_in_Internet_Research)  
[Susan Barnes, “A Privacy Paradox,” 2006](http://firstmonday.org/article/view/1394/1312)  
[Bettina Berendt, Marco Büchler, and Geoffrey Rockwell, “Is it Research or is it Spying? Thinking-Through Ethics in Big Data AI and Other Knowledge Sciences,” 2015)](http://theoreti.ca/?p=5729)  
[Michael Zimmer and Katharina Kinder-Kurlanda, editors, *Internet Research Ethics for the Social Age: New Challenges, Cases, and Contexts*, 2017](https://www.scribd.com/document/360717441/Internet-Research-Ethics-for-the-Social-Age-New-Challenges-Cases-and-Contexts-Full)  
[Patrick Sweeney, "Images of Faces Gleaned from Social Media in Social Psychological Research on Sexual Orientation," 2017](https://www.academia.edu/34001772/Images_of_Faces_Gleaned_from_Social_Media_in_Social_Psychological_Research_on_Sexual_Orientation)  
[Safiya Umoja Noble, *The Intersectional Internet: Race, Sex, Class, and Culture Online*, 2016](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1433130009/ref=cm_sw_r_sms_awd_d_JdrqxbYHPQSAT)  
[Matthew Zook, Solon Barocas, danah boyd, Kate Crawford, Emily Keller, Seeta Peña Gangadharan, Alyssa Goodman, Rachelle Hollander, Barbara A. Koenig, Jacob Metcalf, Arvind Narayanan, Alondra Nelson, Frank Pasquale, "Ten simple rules for responsible big data research," 2017](http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005399)  
[Jason Young and Michael Gilmore, "Subaltern Empowerment in the Geoweb: Tensions between Publicity and Privacy," 2014](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/anti.12056)  

## On ethics, algorithms and databases:

[Tarleton Gillespie and Nick Seaver, Critical Algorithm Studies: a Reading List, 2016](https://socialmediacollective.org/reading-lists/critical-algorithm-studies/)  
[Safiya Umoja Noble, *Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism*, 2018](https://nyupress.org/books/9781479837243/)  
[Cathy O'Neil, *Methods of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens Democracy*, 2016](https://weaponsofmathdestructionbook.com/)  
[Julia Angwen and Jeff Larson, "Bias in Criminal Risk Scores Is Mathematically Inevitable, Researchers Say," 2016](https://www.propublica.org/article/bias-in-criminal-risk-scores-is-mathematically-inevitable-researchers-say)  
[ProPublica's series of articles on "Machine Bias: Investigating Algorithmic Injustice"](https://www.propublica.org/series/machine-bias/)  
[The Brian Lehrer Show, "Getting Algorithms Right" (podcast), 2018](https://www.wnyc.org/story/algorithms-better-or-worse/)  
[The Policing in Chicago Research Group, "Tracked and Targeted: Early Findings on Chicago's Gang Database," 2018](http://erasethedatabase.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Tracked-Targeted-0217.pdf)  
[Darren Abramson and Lee Pike, "When Formal Systems Kill: Computer Ethics and Formal Methods," 2011](https://www.cs.indiana.edu/~lepike/pubs/fm-ethics.pdf)  
[Anna Lauren Hoffmann, "Data Violence and How Bad Engineering Choices Can Damage Society," 2018](https://medium.com/s/story/data-violence-and-how-bad-engineering-choices-can-damage-society-39e44150e1d4)  
[Roshanak Kheshti, interviewed by Kelsey Chatlosh, "Interview: Sound recording, oral positionality, and audio as ethnographic object," 2018](http://parameters.ssrc.org/2018/04/interview-sound-recording-oral-positionality-and-audio-as-ethnographic-object/)  
[Doug Boyd, "Informed Accessioning: Questions to Ask After the Interview," 2015](http://ohda.matrix.msu.edu/2015/03/informed-accessioning-questions-to-ask-after-the-interview/)  

## On accessibility and openness:

[Patrick Smyth, "Materials for Open and Accessible: A Critical Distinction at Teach@CUNY Day"](https://github.com/pbsmyth/open_and_accessible)  
[Samir Chopra and Scott Dexter, *Decoding Liberation: The Promise of Free and Open Source Software*, 2007](http://www.sci.brooklyn.cuny.edu/~bcfoss/DL/)  
[Creative Commons](https://creativecommons.org/)  
[Shawn Lawton Henry, Shadi Abou-Zahra, and 	Judy Brewer, "The role of accessibility in a universal web," 2014](https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2596695.2596719)  
[Dr. Joshua Miele’s](http://www.ski.org/users/joshua-miele) work on digital accessibility - see a review of his GC talk by Nanyamkah Mars [here](http://dh.prattsils.org/blog/resources/event-reviews/digital-accessibility-and-the-making-of-a-meta-maker-movement-a-talk-by-dr-joshua-miele-hosted-by-gc-digital-initiatives-at-the-graduate-center-cuny-on-thursday-october-20-2016/)  
[George Williams, "Disability, Universal Design, and the Digital Humanities" in *Debates in the Digital Humanities*, ed. Matt Gold, 2012](http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/44)  
[Tyler Zoanni, "Creating an Accessible Online Presentation," 2017](https://culanth.org/fieldsights/1335-creating-an-accessible-online-presentation)  
[Humanidades Digitales Library Guide, prepared by The Graduate Center, CUNY, Library](https://libguides.gc.cuny.edu/c.php?g=405353&p=5674973)  

## On data security and management:  

[Patrick Smyth, GCDI Information Security Workshop](https://github.com/smythp/security-workshop)  
[Stephen Zweibel, Data Management (presentation), 2017](http://zweibel.net/presentations/data.html#/)  
[Lindsay Lloyd-Smith, “Archaeology: Principles and Practices of Digital Data Management," 2016](http://www.americananthro.org/LearnAndTeach/Content.aspx?ItemNumber=20668)   

## On ethical and political debates within the field of digital humanities (DH):

[Domenico Fiormonte, "Digital Humanities and the Geopolitics of Knowledge," 2017](https://www.digitalstudies.org/article/10.16995/dscn.274/)  
[Wendy Hui Kyong Chun, Richard Grusin, Patrick Jagoda, and Rita Raley, "The Dark Side of the Digital Humanities" in *Debates in the Digital Humanities*, ed. Matt Gold, 2016](http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/89)  
[Tara McPherson, "Why Are the Digital Humanities So White? or Thinking the Histories of Race and Computation" in *Debates in the Digital Humanities*, ed. Matt Gold, 2012](http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/29)  
[Elizabeth Losh, "Hacktivism and the Humanities: Programming Protest in the Era of the Digital University" in *Debates in the Digital Humanities*, ed. Matt Gold, 2012](http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/32)  

## On divisions of labor on digital projects and "digital carework" (Risam 2018):  

[Roopika Risam, "Diversity work and digital carework in higher education," 2018](http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/8241/6651)  
[Rafia Mirza, Brett Currier and Peace Ossom Williamson, "Memorandum of Understanding Collection" - MOUs to apply for large scale collaborative projects](https://uta-ir.tdl.org/uta-ir/handle/10106/25646)  
[Audrey Watters, "Invisible Labor and Digital Utopias," 2018](http://hackeducation.com/2018/05/04/cuny-labor-open)  

## On labor, political economy, and technology: 

[Xiang Biao, *Global Body Shopping: An Indian Labor System in the Information Technology Industry*, 2007](https://press.princeton.edu/titles/8315.html)  
[Elsa Davidson, *The Burdens of Aspiration: Schools, Youth, and Success in the Divided Social Worlds of Silicon Valley*, 2011](https://nyupress.org/books/9780814720875/)  

## On post- / de- / anti- colonial digital humanities (DH):

[Adeline Koh and Roopika Risam, Postcolonial Digital Humanities (website)](http://dhpoco.org/)  
[Ashley Morford and Arun Jacob, session leaders, "Let's Plan a Course: Bringing the Anti-, De-, & Post-Colonial into Digital Space, Time, & Pedagogy" at DHSI 2017 (unconference session notes)](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15XLNrzZLaC3ZfNh1Z4ssppEmB49mlhmlCMvVR8Ofw5w/edit?usp=sharing)  

### Some examples of anti-colonial digital projects and research:

[Design for Diversity project](http://dsg.neu.edu/research/design-for-diversity/about/)  
[Siobhan Senier, “Indigenizing Wikipedia,” 2015](http://epress.trincoll.edu/webwriting/chapter/senier/)  
[Angela Haas, “Wampum as Hypertext,” 2007](https://muse.jhu.edu/article/235980)  
[Marisa Elena Duarte, *Network Sovereignty: Building the Internet across Indian Country*, 2017](http://www.washington.edu/uwpress/search/books/DUANET.html)  
[The #StandingRockSyllabus](https://nycstandswithstandingrock.wordpress.com/standingrocksyllabus/)  
[Native-Land.ca (mapping project)](https://native-land.ca/)  
[Invasion of America: How the United States Took Over an Eighth of the World (mapping project)](http://usg.maps.arcgis.com/apps/webappviewer/index.html?id=eb6ca76e008543a89349ff2517db47e6) 

## On digital activism, its possibilities and its limitations:

[Zeynep Tufekci, "After the Protests," 2014](https://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/20/opinion/after-the-protests.html?rref=collection%2Fcolumn%2Fzeynep-tufekci&action=click&contentCollection=opinion&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=14&pgtype=collection)  
[Zeynep Tufekci, *Twitter and Teargas: The Power and Fragility of Networked Protest*, 2017](https://www.twitterandteargas.org/)  
[Sasha Costanza-Chock, *Out of the Shadows, Into the Streets! Transmedia Organizing and the Immigrant Rights Movement*, 2014](https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/out-shadows-streets)  
[Aimee Cox, "The Choreography of Survival," 2015](https://culanth.org/fieldsights/690-the-choreography-of-survival)  
[Melissa Checker, "Stop FEMA Now: Social media, activism and the sacrificed citizen," 2016](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0016718516301750)  
[Jarret Martineau, "Rhythms of Change: Mobilizing Decolonial Consciousness, Indigenous Resurgence and the Idle No More Movement," in *More Will Sing Their Way to Freedom: Indigenous Resistance and Resurgence*, ed. Elaine Coburn, 2015](https://fernwoodpublishing.ca/book/more-will-sing-their-way-to-freedom)  

******

## Know of more useful resources that are not listed above?

Email me to request to add something to this resource list:

Kelsey Chatlosh  
GC, CUNY, Digital Fellow  
Cultural Anthropology Student  
Kchatlosh@gradcenter.cuny.edu  
She / her  

[<<< Previous](cases.md)  
[<<< Return to beginning](https://github.com/DHRI-Curriculum/ethics)
