sections/review.md, before:

[<<< Previous](cases.md) | [Next >>>](resources.md)

# Review  

## Workshop debrief

By the end of this workshop, participants have:

* Reviewed ethical practices to satisfy institutional needs (IRB) when working with "human subjects."
* Learned specific ethical questions and levels of impact to consider when doing various forms of digital research and using digital tools.
* Engaged with alternative approaches and case examples.
* Envisioned the ethics of their own projects and methodologies.

## Next steps 

### Determine institutional requirements

- Why was IRB review instituted?
- Will you apply for IRB?

### Explore ethics beyond compliance

- What are the three levels of impact that we discussed?
- What does range of impact refer to?
- Which will you consider?

### Reassess your research methodology

- How will the above affect your research/project methods and design?
- Is your research free and open or proprietary?
- Is your research accessible?

Refer to the following [Resources](resources.md) page for further readings, projects, and advice.

[<<< Previous](cases.md) | [Next >>>](resources.md)

Commit message:

changed "glossary" to next page

sections/review.md, after:

[<<< Previous](cases.md) | [Next >>>](glossary.md)

# Review  

## Workshop debrief

By the end of this workshop, participants have:

* Reviewed ethical practices to satisfy institutional needs (IRB) when working with "human subjects."
* Learned specific ethical questions and levels of impact to consider when doing various forms of digital research and using digital tools.
* Engaged with alternative approaches and case examples.
* Envisioned the ethics of their own projects and methodologies.

## Next steps 

### Determine institutional requirements

- Why was IRB review instituted?
- Will you apply for IRB?

### Explore ethics beyond compliance

- What are the three levels of impact that we discussed?
- What does range of impact refer to?
- Which will you consider?

### Reassess your research methodology

- How will the above affect your research/project methods and design?
- Is your research free and open or proprietary?
- Is your research accessible?

Refer to the following [Glossary](glossary.md) page for a review of key terms, and to the [Resources](resources.md) page after it for further readings, projects, and advice.

[<<< Previous](cases.md) | [Next >>>](glossary.md)  
[<<< Return to the beginning](https://github.com/DHRI-Curriculum/ethics)
